<summary>  This paper presents ESCAPE, an informed moving target defense mechanism for
cloud containers. ESCAPE models the interaction between attackers and their
target containers as a "predator searching for a prey" search game. Live
migration of Linux-containers (\textit{prey}) is used to avoid attacks
(\textit{predator}) and failures. The entire process is guided by a novel
host-based behavior-monitoring system that seamlessly monitors containers for
indications of intrusions and attacks. To evaluate ESCAPE effectiveness, we
simulated the attack avoidance process based on a mathematical model mimicking
the prey-vs-predator search game. Simulation results show high container
survival probabilities with minimal added overhead.
</summary><summary>  Linux containers are gaining increasing traction in both individual and
industrial use, and as these containers get integrated into mission-critical
systems, real-time detection of malicious cyber attacks becomes a critical
operational requirement. This paper introduces a real-time host-based intrusion
detection system that can be used to passively detect malfeasance against
applications within Linux containers running in a standalone or in a cloud
multi-tenancy environment. The demonstrated intrusion detection system uses
bags of system calls monitored from the host kernel for learning the behavior
of an application running within a Linux container and determining anomalous
container behavior. Performance of the approach using a database application
was measured and results are discussed.
</summary><summary>  In this paper, we present the results of using bags of system calls for
learning the behavior of Linux containers for use in anomaly-detection based
intrusion detection system. By using system calls of the containers monitored
from the host kernel for anomaly detection, the system does not require any
prior knowledge of the container nature, neither does it require altering the
container or the host kernel.
</summary><summary>  Linked Data technologies become increasingly important in many domains. Key
factors for their breakthrough are security and trust, especially when sensible
or personal data are involved. Classical means for access control lack
granularity when parts of the Linked Data graph must be protected. The WebID,
combining semantic web concepts with methods from certificate based
authentication and authorization, seems promising to fulfill all requirements
concerning security and trust in the semantic web. In the context of the
PerSemID project, we challenged the WebID technology in a practical scenario
coming from the domain of lifelong learning and student mobility. In our use
case of study enrollment, we use WebIDs for authentication and to grant access
to parts of the triple stores of the different stakeholders. Cross domain
triple store interactions are used to exchange data between the involved
parties. Our fully implemented PoC exemplifies an application built on Linked
Data and WebID and allows us to judge the usability and security of WebID
technology in a real world scenario.
</summary><summary>  An increasing number of individuals are turning to Direct-To-Consumer (DTC)
genetic testing to learn about their predisposition to diseases, traits, and/or
ancestry. DTC companies like 23andme and Ancestry.com have started to offer
popular and affordable ancestry and genealogy tests, with services allowing
users to find unknown relatives and long-distant cousins. Naturally, access and
possible dissemination of genetic data prompts serious privacy concerns, thus
motivating the need to design efficient primitives supporting private genetic
tests. In this paper, we present an effective protocol for privacy-preserving
genetic relatedness test (PPGRT), enabling a cloud server to run relatedness
tests on input an encrypted genetic database and a test facility's encrypted
genetic sample. We reduce the test to a data matching problem and perform it,
privately, using searchable encryption. Finally, a performance evaluation of
hamming distance based PP-GRT attests to the practicality of our proposals.
</summary>