<summary>  It was proved by Almgren that among boundaries whose mean curvature is
bounded from above, perimeter is uniquely minimized by balls. We obtain sharp
stability estimates for Almgren's isoperimetric principle and, as an
application, we deduce a sharp description of boundaries with almost constant
mean curvature under a total perimeter bound which prevents bubbling.
</summary><summary>  For central banks, managing the minting is one of the most important task
since a shortage yields negative economic and social impacts, and the budget
committed for minting is one of the largest within the central banks. Hence,
the central bank requires to find the mixture of coins to be produced that
satisfies the demand, inventory and production constraints while minimizing the
cost. We propose a mixed-integer programming model that minimize the cost of
minting by reducing the number of extra-shifts required while fulfilling the
constraints. We also perform a simulation with data of a central bank which
shows that the model reduces in 24\% the cost of extra-shifts used during 21
quarters, compared with the spreadsheet based approach used currently at the
operation.
</summary><summary>  Earlier work has established a decentralized optimal control framework for
coordinating online a continuous flow of connected automated vehicles (CAVs)
entering a control zone and crossing two adjacent intersections in an urban
area. A solution, when it exists, allows the vehicles to cross the
intersections without the use of traffic lights, without creating congestion on
the connecting road, and under the hard safety constraint of collision
avoidance. We establish the conditions under which such solutions exist and
show that they can be enforced through an appropriately designed feasibility
enforcement zone that precedes the control zone. The proposed solution and
overall control architecture are illustrated through simulation.
</summary><summary>  In this technical note, we study the controllability of diffusively coupled
networks from a graph theoretic perspective. We consider leader-follower
networks, where the external control inputs are injected to only some of the
agents, namely the leaders. Our main result relates the controllability of such
systems to the graph distances between the agents. More specifically, we
present a graph topological lower bound on the rank of the controllability
matrix. This lower bound is tight, and it is applicable to systems with
arbitrary network topologies, coupling weights, and number of leaders. An
algorithm for computing the lower bound is also provided. Furthermore, as a
prominent application, we present how the proposed bound can be utilized to
select a minimal set of leaders for achieving controllability, even when the
coupling weights are unknown.
</summary><summary>  We propose a method of bi-coordinate variations for non-stationary and
non-smooth optimization problems, which involve a single linear equality and
box constraints. Here only approximation sequences are known instead of exact
values of the cost function and parameters of the feasible set. It consists in
making descent steps with respect to only two selected coordinates satisfying
some special threshold rule. The method is simpler essentially than the usual
gradient or dual type ones and differs from the previous known bi-coordinate
ones suggested for the usual stationary and smooth problems. We establish its
convergence under rather mild assumptions. Computational tests also reveal
certain preferences of the proposed method over the known ones.
</summary>